---
asset_id: 2088F964FB59D7F2A679283B866D9D44
author: Jordan Ellenberg
modified_date: '2022-01-02T01:46:31'
title: Shape
---

# Shape

By Jordan Ellenberg

## My notes <a name="my_notes_dont_delete"></a>



## iBooks notes <a name="ibooks_notes_dont_delete"></a>

### Behold!

What was distinctive about Lincoln, Whitney says, wasn’t that he possessed a superpowered intellect. Lots of people in public life, Whitney writes ruefully, are very smart, and among them one finds both the good and the bad. No: what made Lincoln special was that “it was morally impossible for Lincoln to argue dishonestly; he could no more do it than he could steal; it was the same thing to him in essence, to despoil a man of his property by larceny, or by illogical or flagitious reasoning.” What Lincoln had taken from Euclid (or what, already existing in Lincoln, harmonized with what he found in Euclid) was integrity, the principle that one does not say a thing unless one has justified, fair and square, that one has the right to say it. Geometry is a form of honesty. They might have called him Geometrical Abe.

### “Nobody Doubts Nowadays That the Geometry of N Dimensions Is a Real Object”

In fact, there’s a way of measuring spaces called the Euler characteristic, which is an invariant for topology, unchanged by any kind of continuous smooshing. You can think of it as one minus the number of holes

A way to describe the Euler characteristic, if you want it to seem less weird, is as a difference between two numbers, the number of even-dimensional holes and the number of odd-dimensional holes.