---
asset_id: D90670BB7F81C50B106D7957BE1B440B
author: Noam Chomsky David Barsamian Arthur Naiman
modified_date: '2024-11-27T23:56:35'
title: How the World Works
---

# How the World Works

By Noam Chomsky David Barsamian Arthur Naiman

## My notes <a name="my_notes_dont_delete"></a>



## iBooks notes <a name="ibooks_notes_dont_delete"></a>

“The leading dove was undoubtedly George Kennan, who headed the State Department planning staff until 1950, when he was replaced by Nitze—Kennan’s office, incidentally, was responsible for the Gehlen network.
Kennan was one of the most intelligent and lucid of US planners, and a major figure in shaping the postwar world. His writings are an extremely interesting illustration of the dovish position. One document to look at if you want to understand your country is Policy Planning Study 23, written by Kennan for the State Department planning staff in 1948. Here’s some of what it says:We have about 50% of the world’s wealth but only 6.3% of its population....In this situation, we cannot fail to be the object of envy and resentment. Our real task in the coming period is to devise a pattern of relationships which will  permit us to maintain this position of disparity....To do so, we will have to dispense with all sentimentality and daydreaming; and our attention will have to be concentrated everywhere on our immediate national objectives....We should cease to talk about vague and...unreal objectives such as human rights, the raising of the living standards, and democratization. The day is not far off when we are going to have to deal in straight power concepts. The less we are then hampered by idealistic slogans, the better.


PPS 23 was, of course, a top-secret document. To pacify the public, it was necessary to trumpet the “idealistic slogans” (as is still being done constantly), but here planners were talking to one another.

A study of the inter-American system published by the Royal Institute of International Affairs in London concluded that, while the US pays lip service to democracy, the real commitment is to “private, capitalist enterprise.” When the rights of  investors are threatened, democracy has to go; if these rights are safeguarded, killers and torturers will do just fine.
Parliamentary governments were barred or overthrown, with US support and sometimes direct intervention, in Iran in 1953, in Guatemala in 1954 (and in 1963, when Kennedy backed a military coup to prevent the threat of a return to democracy), in the Dominican Republic in 1963 and 1965, in Brazil in 1964, in Chile in 1973 and often elsewhere

If you want a global system that’s subordinated to the needs of US investors, you can’t let pieces of it wander off. It’s striking how clearly this is stated in the documentary record—even in the public record at times. Take Chile under Allende.Chile is a fairly big place, with a lot of natural resources, but again, the United States wasn’t going to collapse if Chile became  independent. Why were we so concerned about it? According to Kissinger, Chile was a “virus” that would “infect” the region with effects all the way to Italy.

If segments of the public depart from their apathy and begin to organize and enter the public arena, that’s not democracy. Rather, it’s a crisis of democracy in proper technical usage, a threat that has to be overcome in one or another way: in El Salvador, by death squads; at home, by more subtle and indirect means.
Or take free enterprise, a term that refers, in practice, to a system of public subsidy and private profit, with massive government intervention in the economy to maintain a welfare state for the rich. In fact, in acceptable usage, just about any phrase containing the word “free” is likely to mean the opposite of its actual, literal meaning.
Or take defense against aggression, a phrase that’s used—predictably—to refer to aggression. When the US attacked South Vietnam in the early 1960s, the liberal hero Adlai Stevenson (among others) explained that we were defending South Vietnam against “internal aggression”—that is, the aggression of South Vietnamese peasants against the US air force and a US-run mercenary army, which were driving them out of their homes and into concentration camps where they could be “protected” from the southern guerrillas. In fact, these peasants willingly supported the guerillas, while the US client regime was an empty shell, as was agreed on all sides.

One can debate the meaning of the term socialism, but if it means anything, it means control of production by the workers themselves, not owners and managers who rule them and control all decisions, whether in capitalist enterprises or an absolutist state.
To refer to the Soviet Union as “socialist” is an interesting case of doctrinal doublespeak. The Bolshevik coup of October 1917 placed state power in the hands of Lenin and Trotsky, who moved quickly to dismantle the incipient socialist institutions that had grown up during the popular revolution of the preceding months—the factory councils, the soviets [popularly elected legislative assembies], in fact any organ of popular control—and to convert the workforce into what they called a “labor army” under the command of the leader. In any meaningful sense of the term “socialism,” the Bolsheviks moved at once to destroy its existing elements. No socialist deviation has been permitted since.

That brings in the whole question of race and racism and how that factored into the relationship between the North and the South.
There has always been racism. But it developed as a leading principle of thought and perception in the context of colonialism. That’s understandable. When you have your boot on someone’s neck, you have to justify it. The justification has to be their depravity.
It’s very striking to see this in the case of people who aren’t very different from one another. Take a look at the British conquest of Ireland, the earliest of the Western colonial conquests. It was described in the same terms as the conquest of Africa. The Irish were a different race. They weren’t human. They weren’t like us. We had to crush and destroy them.
Some Marxists say racism is a product of the economic system, of capitalism. Would you accept that?
No. It has to do with conquest, with oppression. If you’re robbing somebody, oppressing them, dictating their lives, it’s a very rare person who can say: Look, I’m a monster. I’m doing this for my own good. Even Himmler didn’t say that.
A standard technique of belief formation goes along with oppression, whether it’s throwing them in gas chambers or charging them too much at a corner store, or anything in between. The standard reaction is to say: It’s their depravity. That’s why I’m doing it. Maybe I’m even doing them good.

Lingering in the shadows of the liberal democracies—where there’s this pyramid of control and domination, where there’s class and race and gender bias—is coercion, force.
That comes from the fact that objective power is concentrated. It lies in various places, like in patriarchy, in race. Crucially it also lies in ownership.
If you think about the way the society generally works, it’s pretty much the way the founding fathers said. As John Jay put it, “The country should be governed by those who own it” and the owners intend to follow Adam Smith’s vile maxim. That’s at the core of things. That can remain even if lots of other things change.
On the other hand, it’s certainly worth overcoming the other forms of oppression. For people’s lives, racism and sexism may be much worse than class oppression. When a kid was lynched in the South, that was worse than being paid low wages. So when we talk about the roots of the system of oppression, that can’t be spelled out simply in terms of suffering. Suffering is an independent dimension, and you want to overcome suffering.

If you want to create a humane world, you change the circumstances.

rces.
What the public wants is called “politically unrealistic.” Translated into English, that means the major centers of power and privilege are opposed to it. A change in our healthcare system has now become politically more realistic because the corporate community wants a change, since the current system is harming them.
 Vicente Navarro says that a universal and comprehensive healthcare program is “directly related to the strength of the working class and its political and economic instruments.”
 That’s certainly been true in Canada and Europe. Canada had a system rather like ours up until the mid-1960s. It was changed first in one province, Saskatchewan, where the NDP [the New Democratic Party, a mildly reformist, umbrella political party with labor backing] was in power.
The NDP was able to put through a provincial insurance program, driving the insurance companies out of the healthcare business. It turned out to be very successful. It was giving good medical care and reducing costs and was much more progressive in payment. It was mimicked by other provinces, also under labor pressure, often using the NDP as an instrument. Pretty soon it was adopted across Canada nationally.
The history in Europe is pretty much the same. Working-class organizations have been one of the main (although not the only) mechanisms by which people with very limited power and resources can get together to participate in the public arena. That’s one of the reasons unions are so hated by business and elites generally. They’re just too democratizing in their character.
So Navarro is surely right. The strength and organization of labor and its ability to enter into the public arena is certainly related—maybe even decisively related—to the establishment of social programs of this kind.

General Reinhard Gehlen was the head of German military intelligence on the Eastern Front. That’s where the real war crimes were. Now we’re talking about Auschwitz and other death camps. Gehlen and his network of spies and terrorists were taken over quickly by American intelligence and returned to essentially the same roles.
If you look at the American army’s counterinsurgency literature (a lot of which is now declassified), it begins with an analysis of the German experience in Europe, written with the cooperation of Nazi officers. Everything is described from the point of  view of the Nazis: which techniques for controlling resistance worked, which ones didn’t. With barely a change, that was transmuted into American counterinsurgency literature. (This is discussed at some length by Michael McClintock in Instruments of Statecraft, a very good book that I’ve never seen reviewed.)

Kissinger said he was concerned that the success of social democracy in Chile would be contagious. It would infect southern Europe—southern Italy, for example—and would lead to the possible success of what was then called Eurocommunism (meaning that Communist parties would hook up with social democratic parties in a united front).
Actually, the Kremlin was just as much opposed to Eurocommunism as Kissinger was, but this gives you a very clear picture of what the domino theory is all about. Even Kissinger, mad as he is, didn’t believe that Chilean armies were going to descend on Rome. It wasn’t going to be that kind of an influence. He was worried that successful economic development, where the economy produces benefits for the general population—not just profits for private corporations—would have a contagious effect.

In 1996, President Clinton signed something called the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act, which eliminated the federal government’s 61-year commitment to the poor. You’ve said that commitment was always very limited, and that it’s declined sharply since about 1970.

The Times also has columnists—Bob Herbert is one example—that I don’t think you would have seen there forty years ago, and they often write very good stuff.
But in general, the mainstream media all make certain basic assumptions, like the necessity of maintaining a welfare state for the rich. Within that framework, there’s some room for differences of opinion, and it’s entirely possible that the major media are toward the liberal end of that range. In fact, in a well-designed propaganda system, that’s exactly where they should be.
The smart way to keep people passive and obedient is to strictly limit the spectrum of acceptable opinion, but allow very lively debate within that spectrum—even encourage the more critical and dissident views. That gives people the sense that there’s free thinking going on, while all the time the presuppositions of the system are being reinforced by the limits put on the range of the debate.

All over the world, but especially in the US, many workers vote against their own interests—assuming they vote at all.
 I’m not sure that’s true. Neither major party here represents workers’ interests, but suppose there were candidates who did, and that US workers trusted them and were confident they’d try to do exactly what the workers wanted. There still might be a good reason not to vote for them.
When poor people in Central America vote for their own interests, the result is terror—organized and directed by the superpower of the hemisphere, and supervised on the local level by the upper classes of that country. Many countries are so weak that they can’t really solve their internal problems in the face of US power; they can’t even control their own wealthy. Their rich have virtually no social obligations—they don’t pay taxes and don’t keep their money in the country.
Unless these problems are dealt with, poor people will sometimes choose to vote for oppressors, rather than suffer the violence of the rich (which can take the form of terror and torture, or can simply be a matter of sending the country’s capital somewhere else).

It was extremely hard to get anything critical of Israel published, let alone distributed. The PLO could easily have helped, simply by buying books and sending them to libraries, but they were completely unwilling to do anything. They had huge amounts of money—they were brokering big deals between Kuwait and Hungary and who knows who else—but it was a very corrupt organization.
They insisted on portraying themselves as flaming revolutionaries, waving guns…which of course is going to alienate everyone. If they’d portrayed themselves as what they actually were—conservative nationalists who wanted to make money and maybe elect their own mayors—it would have increased the support in the United States for a Palestinian state from about 2 to 1 to about 20 to 1.
I think they believed that politics isn’t about what the general population thinks or does, but about deals you make in back rooms with powerful people. (Incidentally, I heard much harsher criticisms of the PLO from activists and leaders in the Occupied Territories when I was there a few years later.)
 If, as you’ve said, Israel is the local cop on the beat in the Mideast, why did the US go to such lengths to keep it out of the Gulf War?
 Because if Israel had become directly involved, it would have been impossible for the US to keep the passive support of the major oil-producing countries in the region, and that’s all Washington was really concerned with. Certainly they didn’t need Israel’s support to fight a war against a virtually defenseless Third World country. After the war, the US reestablished  its domination of the region very strongly and told everybody, “What we say, goes” (as George [H. W.] Bush put it).
 Eqbal Ahmad is rather pessimistic about Israel’s long-term future. He says that sooner or later the relative weakness of Arab states will change.
 I don’t think it makes a lot of sense to try to make predictions about the long-term future. You can imagine a future in which the US is an embattled island, barely able to hold its own against the emerging powers of Asia that surround it. But as far as I can see, the US has about as much control and domination of the Middle East as any outside force could hope to maintain.
Our outpost there, Israel, is by far the main military, technological, industrial and even financial center. The huge oil resources of the region (which are still going to be needed for another couple of generations) are mostly in the hands of family dictatorships, brutal tyrannies that are highly dependent on the US and subordinated to its interests.
It’s quite possible that the system will break down in the long term—but if you’re talking about, say, two centuries from now, the US isn’t even going to care about Mideast oil by then. For the kind of time frame within which policy planning makes any sense—which isn’t long—things are working out as well as US planners could possibly have imagined. If it turns out, at some far distant time, that Israel is no longer necessary for US purposes, our support for Israel will end.

The US attitude was expressed rather neatly by Madeleine Albright in a remark which, as far as I know, wasn’t reported. She was trying to get the Security Council to accept one of our punitive actions toward Iraq; none of the other countries wanted to go along with it, since they recognized that it was really just a part of US domestic politics. So she told them that the US will act “multilaterally when we can and unilaterally as we must.” So would anyone else, if they had the power.

Conventional terms of political discourse like left and right have been almost evacuated of meaning. They’re so distorted and irrelevant it’s almost better to throw them out.
Take Witness for Peace, which has been a very important organization since the 1980s. People from an imperial country actually went down and lived in Third World villages, in the hope that a white face might protect the inhabitants from state terrorists organized by their own country. That’s never happened before.
Was that left or right? It certainly represents the traditional ideals of the left, like justice, freedom, solidarity, sympathy. On the other hand, a lot of it came out of the conservative Christian community. I don’t know where to put Witness for Peace on any political spectrum. It’s just human beings acting decently.

In a lead story, the New York Times Week in Review made an amazing discovery: the new kind of “populism”—as practiced by Steve Forbes, Pat Buchanan and the like—is different from the old kind of populism. The old kind opposes big corporations and plutocrats; the new kind is big corporations and plutocrats. That you can have a character like Steve Forbes on the national scene without people cracking up with laughter shows how intense the propaganda is.

Right now we’re trying to defend a minimal healthcare system; thirty years ago there wasn’t a minimal healthcare system to defend. That’s progress.
All those changes took place because of constant, dedicated struggle, which is hard and can look very depressing for long  periods. Of course you can always find ways in which these new attitudes have been distorted and turned into techniques of oppression, careerism, self-aggrandizement and so on. But the overall change is toward greater humanity.
Unfortunately, this trend hasn’t touched the central areas of power. In fact, it can be tolerated, even supported, by major institutions, as long as it doesn’t get to the heart of the matter—their power and domination over the society, which has actually increased. If these new attitudes really started affecting the distribution of power, you’d have some serious struggles.
 Disney is a good example of the kind of accommodation you’re describing. It exploits Third World labor in Haiti and elsewhere, but domestically it has very liberal policies on gay rights and healthcare.
 It’s perfectly consistent for the kind of corporate oligarchy we have to say that we shouldn’t discriminate among people. They’re all equal—equally lacking in the right to control their own fate, all capable of being passive, apathetic, obedient consumers and workers. The people on top will have greater rights, of course, but they’ll be equally greater rights—regardless of whether they’re black, white, green, gay, heterosexual, men, women, whatever.


As John Dewey put it about seventy years ago, “Politics is the shadow cast on society by big business.” As long as you have highly concentrated, unaccountable private power, politics is just going to be a shadow. But you might as well make use of the shadow as much as possible, and use it to try to undermine what’s casting the shadow.

To say that this is a low point is short-sighted. Is it lower than the 1950s? Is it lower than 1961, when John F. Kennedy sent the Air Force to bomb South Vietnam and you couldn’t get a single person to think about it?
When I gave talks on the war in the mid-1960s, we couldn’t get anybody to attend. Students weren’t interested—except sometimes in attacking the traitors who were condemning government policy. Most of the real and important student activism took place in the late 1960s, and it was by no means “traditional.”

First of all, as we’ve discussed a couple of times already, a large majority already does agree with these ideas. The question is, how to turn those general attitudes into real understanding and constructive actions. The answer is, by organizing to do so.
Whenever I—or anybody—gives a talk, it’s because some group has set it up. I can’t just show up in Kansas City and say, I’m going to give a talk—nobody would come. But if a group there organizes it, people will come from all over the place, and  maybe that will help the organizers, and others, to get together and to proceed more effectively.
This all goes back to the same thing: If people dedicate themselves to organizing and activism, we’ll gain access to broader and broader audiences.
 As you know, I do a one-hour radio program every week. It’s pretty effectively locked out of the Boston-to-Miami corridor, but in the West—in Montana, Colorado, New Mexico, and places like that—it’s much easier to get it on the air.

Speaking truth to power makes no sense. There’s no point in speaking the truth to Henry Kissinger—he knows it already. Instead, speak truth to the powerless—or, better, with the powerless. Then they’ll act to dismantle illegitimate power.