---
asset_id: 7D261C68C8944D15F81A839F794CFFA3
author: Kevin J Mitchell
modified_date: '2023-12-27T06:34:10'
title: Innate How the Wiring of Our Brains Shapes Who We Are
---

# Innate How the Wiring of Our Brains Shapes Who We Are

By Kevin J Mitchell

## My notes <a name="my_notes_dont_delete"></a>



## iBooks notes <a name="ibooks_notes_dont_delete"></a>


Many aspects of the structure of the brain are very highly heritable—that is, most of the variation is due to genetic differences across individuals. Heritability estimates for various measures are: total brain volume, 82%; gray matter volume, 72%; white matter volume, 85%. The heritability for volumes of particular parts of the cortex or of other brain structures ranges from 60% to 80%, while measurements of the thickness of various parts of the cortex show heritabilities of around 50%–70%. Similar results are seen even in very young infants, only a month old.

Collectively, these data show that much of the physical variation in brain structure between individuals is attributable to genetic differences. To put it more simply, our genes have a big effect—by far the predominant effect, in fact—on how our brains are wired, very literally. These findings bear on a common misconception about the role of genes—it does not end at birth. It is not the case that genes establish the initial brain wiring pattern and everything else depends on experience. The genetic program of brain development entails all the growth and maturation that occurs after birth, exactly as for other parts of the body.

So, if we find that the heritability of a trait is, say, 60%, this does not mean that 60% of the absolute value of that trait in a particular individual comes from his or her genes. It would make no sense to say 60% of my height is genetic, for example. It means that, across the population, 60% of the variance (the deviation of individuals from the mean value of the trait) is due to genetic differences. So, if everyone in the population were genetically identical, the variance in the trait would be only 40% of what it actually is.
This brings up another crucial fact about heritability—it is a proportional measure. Say we have some trait that can be affected by both genetics and environment. Height is a good example, as there are strong genetic effects on a person’s potential final adult height, but whether that height is actually attained can be affected by nutrition. If we measure heritability of height in a population where everyone has ready access to food, it will likely be quite high. Most of the variance in the trait will be due to genetic differences, partly because there are few differences in other factors that matter. But if we measure it in a population where access to food is highly unequal, then we may find the heritability is lower. This doesn’t mean the genetic effects have been reduced in an absolute sense—just that their relative importance to the overall variation in the trait is lower, because the environmental variance is higher. Because of this, heritability estimates are always local and historical, applying only to the population in which the trait was measured. The number we find in any study is not a biological constant, equivalent to those we find in physics. It doesn’t measure what factors can affect a trait; it only measures what factors actually do affect a trait, in a given population at a given time. The environment can still affect the mean value of a trait, but if it doesn’t vary much then it won’t contribute to differences in the trait.
Because heritability tells us only about sources of variance within a population and nothing about why the mean value is what it is, it also tells us nothing about sources of differences in mean values between populations. It is quite possible to have a trait that is highly heritable in two populations, but where the difference in the mean value between the populations is caused by nongenetic factors.

 have been emphasizing the heritability of psychological and brain traits in humans, but twin and adoption studies also highlight nongenetic contributions to overall variance. These effects are often assumed to be “environmental” in origin, but we will see that that is not necessarily the case. The same comparisons of MZ and DZ twin pairs or biological versus adoptive siblings that are used to calculate heritability can also be used to estimate the variance explained by different family environments.
Consistently, and surprisingly, this turns out to be very low (usually not more than 10%–15%) and is often found to be zero. Generally speaking, adoptive siblings do not resemble each other for psychological traits any more than two strangers in the street. This is despite being raised in the same household, living in the same community, typically attending the same schools, and so forth. And for many traits, MZ twins who are reared apart are almost as similar to each other as those who have been reared together—sharing a family environment does not make them appreciably more similar.

If genetic effects account for 40%–60% of the phenotypic variance and family environments account for only 0%–10%, that clearly leaves a good chunk of the variance unexplained. Something else is making people different from each other, even MZ twins who grow up in the same family. That factor is referred to as the “nonshared environment,” but we will see in later chapters that much of this may be caused not by any factors outside the organism, but by inherent variation in the processes of development themselves.

The degree of robustness in individuals depends on their mutational load, which varies across people in many ways. First, some of us simply carry more major mutations than others—the average is somewhere around 150, depending on how they are defined, but there is substantial variation around that. Second, the particular set of mutations will affect more developmental genes in some people compared with others. And finally, the specific combination of mutations and of more common genetic variants that each of us carries may cause a greater or lesser impact on the developmental program.
This means that developmental robustness—or its converse, developmental variability—may itself be a genetic trait that varies between people, correlated with the effective mutational load. I mentioned earlier that you can see the effects of developmental variability by looking at facial asymmetry, but some people are more asymmetric than others. If you take many measures of different body parts and facial features you can get a composite measure of asymmetry in any individual. Twin studies have shown this trait is at least partly genetic, with a heritability of about 30%. Indeed, if you look at pairs of MZ twins, there is a correlation between how similar they are to each other and how symmetric each twin is.

This highlights the key fact that synesthesia tends to run in families. Over 40% of synesthetes report a similarly affected first-degree relative. Of course, this leaves 60% of cases as “sporadic” but, as described for neurodevelopmental disorders (see chapter 10), such cases can also have a genetic cause if they are due to new mutations. In families with multiple synesthetes, the pattern of inheritance appears strikingly Mendelian—most consistent with causation by a single dominant mutation, which some family members inherit and others don’t. As with some of the other conditions mentioned above, the identities of the particular genes involved are not yet known, though efforts are currently under way to find them. I say “genes,” plural, because, while it seems a single mutation is at play in each family, all the evidence to date suggests these are not all in the same gene across different families.
One of the more striking findings from these kinds of genetic studies, including one carried out by my colleagues Kylie Barnett and Fiona Newell and myself, is that different forms of synesthesia are observed in different members of the same family (as Nabokov also noted for his mother’s musical form). This means that what is inherited is a predisposition to develop synesthesia in a general sense, but the precise form that emerges in any individual is not so tightly determined. This raises two key questions: What might the functions of those genes be? And what other factors determine the precise outcome in any individual?

Similarly, some types of epilepsy are highly heritable, but the anatomical locus of seizure activity varies considerably, even between MZ twins. The same logic may apply for synesthesia, where differences in type have also been observed even between MZ twins. There may be a certain probability for excess connections to be formed or retained between any given cortical areas, but the precise outcome in any individual will depend on how that probability plays out across the brain.

We know from these concordance rates that people who develop, say, autism, were at really high risk of developing autism. I know that sounds bizarre, but it’s actually a really important point. What you’d want to do to measure someone’s overall genomic risk of a disorder (given the person in question already has it) is clone that person a bunch of times and see how many of the clones also develop the condition. Say we made 100 clones—maybe only 10 of them would develop it, or maybe 50, or maybe all of them. We obviously can’t do that experiment, but we can look at natural clones—MZ twins. We only get one shot for each person, but if we average across many pairs of twins we at least get an average genetic risk associated with the genomes of people who already have the condition. For autism, this risk is about 80%. It’s not like those people inherited a low risk and were just unlucky in how things turned out. They inherited an enormously high risk.

that variation in our genes and the way our brains develop cause differences in innate behavioral predispositions—variation in our behavioral tendencies and capacities. Those predispositions certainly influence how we behave in any given circumstance but do not by themselves determine it—they just generate a baseline on top of which other processes act. We learn from our experiences, we adapt to our environments, we develop habitual ways of acting that are in part driven by our personality traits, but that are also appropriately context dependent.